lib/elixir/pages/getting-started/writing-documentation.md, before:

# Writing documentation

Elixir treats documentation as a first-class citizen. Documentation must be easy to write and easy to read. In this guide you will learn how to write documentation in Elixir, covering constructs like module attributes, style practices, and doctests.

## Markdown

Elixir documentation is written using Markdown. There are plenty of guides on Markdown online, we recommend the one from GitHub as a getting started point:

  * [Basic writing and formatting syntax](https://help.github.com/articles/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax/)

## Module Attributes

Documentation in Elixir is usually attached to module attributes. Let's see an example:

```elixir
defmodule MyApp.Hello do
  @moduledoc """
  This is the Hello module.
  """
  @moduledoc since: "1.0.0"

  @doc """
  Says hello to the given `name`.

  Returns `:ok`.

  ## Examples

      iex> MyApp.Hello.world(:john)
      :ok

  """
  @doc since: "1.3.0"
  def world(name) do
    IO.puts("hello #{name}")
  end
end
```

The `@moduledoc` attribute is used to add documentation to the module. `@doc` is used before a function to provide documentation for it. Besides the attributes above, `@typedoc` can also be used to attach documentation to types defined as part of typespecs.

## Function arguments

When documenting a function, argument names are inferred by the compiler. For example:

```elixir
def size(%{size: size}) do
  size
end
```

The compiler will infer this argument as `map`. Sometimes the inference will be suboptimal, especially if the function contains multiple clauses with the argument matching on different values each time. You can specify the proper names for documentation by declaring only the function head at any moment before the implementation:

```elixir
def size(map_with_size)

def size(%{size: size}) do
  size
end
```

## Documentation metadata

Elixir allows developers to attach arbitrary metadata to the documentation. This is done by passing a keyword list to the relevant attribute (such as `@moduledoc`, `@typedoc`, and `@doc`). A commonly used metadata is `:since`, which annotates in which version that particular module, function, type, or callback was added, as shown in the example above.

Another common metadata is `:deprecated`, which emits a warning in the documentation, explaining that its usage is discouraged:

```elixir
@doc deprecated: "Use Foo.bar/2 instead"
```

Note that the `:deprecated` key does not warn when a developer invokes the functions. If you want the code to also emit a warning, you can use the `@deprecated` attribute:

```elixir
@deprecated "Use Foo.bar/2 instead"
```

Metadata can have any key. Documentation tools often use metadata to provide more data to readers and to enrich the user experience.

## Recommendations

When writing documentation:

  * Keep the first paragraph of the documentation concise and simple, typically one-line. Tools like [ExDoc](https://github.com/elixir-lang/ex_doc/) use the first line to generate a summary.

  * Reference modules by their full name. Markdown uses backticks (`` ` ``) to quote code. Elixir builds on top of that to automatically generate links when module or function names are referenced. For this reason, always use full module names. If you have a module called `MyApp.Hello`, always reference it as `` `MyApp.Hello` `` and never as `` `Hello` ``.

  * Reference functions by name and arity if they are local, as in `` `world/1` ``, or by module, name and arity if pointing to an external module: `` `MyApp.Hello.world/1` ``.

  * Reference a `@callback` by prepending `c:`, as in `` `c:world/1` ``.

  * Reference a `@type` by prepending `t:`, as in `` `t:values/0` ``.

  * Start new sections with second level Markdown headers `##`. First level headers are reserved for module and function names.

  * Place documentation before the first clause of multi-clause functions. Documentation is always per function and arity and not per clause.

  * Use the `:since` key in the documentation metadata to annotate whenever new functions or modules are added to your API.

## Doctests

We advise developers to include examples in their documentation, often under their own `## Examples` heading. To ensure examples do not get out of date, Elixir's test framework (ExUnit) provides a feature called doctests that allows developers to test the examples in their documentation. Doctests work by parsing out code samples starting with `iex>` from the documentation. You can read more about them at `ExUnit.DocTest`.

## Documentation != Code comments

Elixir treats documentation and code comments as different concepts. Documentation is an explicit contract between you and users of your Application Programming Interface (API), be they third-party developers, co-workers, or your future self. Modules and functions must always be documented if they are part of your API.

Code comments are aimed at developers reading the code. They are useful for marking improvements, leaving notes (for example, why you had to resort to a workaround due to a bug in a library), and so forth. They are tied to the source code: you can completely rewrite a function and remove all existing code comments, and it will continue to behave the same, with no change to either its behavior or its documentation.

Because private functions cannot be accessed externally, Elixir will warn if a private function has a `@doc` attribute and will discard its content. However, you can add code comments to private functions, as with any other piece of code, and we recommend developers to do so whenever they believe it will add relevant information to the readers and maintainers of such code.

In summary, documentation is a contract with users of your API, who may not necessarily have access to the source code, whereas code comments are for those who interact directly with the source. You can learn and express different guarantees about your software by separating those two concepts.

## Hiding internal modules and functions

Besides the modules and functions libraries provide as part of their public interface, libraries may also implement important functionality that is not part of their API. While these modules and functions can be accessed, they are meant to be internal to the library and thus should not have documentation for end users.

Conveniently, Elixir allows developers to hide modules and functions from the documentation, by setting `@doc false` to hide a particular function, or `@moduledoc false` to hide the whole module. If a module is hidden, you may even document the functions in the module, but the module itself won't be listed in the documentation:

```elixir
defmodule MyApp.Hidden do
  @moduledoc false

  @doc """
  This function won't be listed in docs.
  """
  def function_that_wont_be_listed_in_docs do
    # ...
  end
end
```

In case you don't want to hide a whole module, you can hide functions individually:

```elixir
defmodule MyApp.Sample do
  @doc false
  def add(a, b), do: a + b
end
```

However, keep in mind `@moduledoc false` or `@doc false` do not make a function private. The function above can still be invoked as `MyApp.Sample.add(1, 2)`. Not only that, if `MyApp.Sample` is imported, the `add/2` function will also be imported into the caller. For those reasons, be cautious when adding `@doc false` to functions, instead use one of these two options:

  * Move the undocumented function to a module with `@moduledoc false`, like `MyApp.Hidden`, ensuring the function won't be accidentally exposed or imported. Remember that you can use `@moduledoc false` to hide a whole module and still document each function with `@doc`. Tools will still ignore the module.

  * Start the function name with one or two underscores, for example, `__add__/2`. Functions starting with underscore are automatically treated as hidden, although you can also be explicit and add `@doc false`. The compiler does not import functions with leading underscores and they hint to anyone reading the code of their intended private usage.

## `Code.fetch_docs/1`

Elixir stores documentation inside pre-defined chunks in the bytecode. Documentation is not loaded into memory when modules are loaded, instead, it can be read from the bytecode in disk using the `Code.fetch_docs/1` function. The downside is that modules defined in-memory, like the ones defined in IEx, cannot have their documentation accessed as they do not write their bytecode to disk.

Commit message:

Add support for :group doc metadata and use it in IEx.Autocomplete

lib/elixir/pages/getting-started/writing-documentation.md, after:

# Writing documentation

Elixir treats documentation as a first-class citizen. Documentation must be easy to write and easy to read. In this guide you will learn how to write documentation in Elixir, covering constructs like module attributes, style practices, and doctests.

## Markdown

Elixir documentation is written using Markdown. There are plenty of guides on Markdown online, we recommend the one from GitHub as a getting started point:

  * [Basic writing and formatting syntax](https://help.github.com/articles/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax/)

## Module Attributes

Documentation in Elixir is usually attached to module attributes. Let's see an example:

```elixir
defmodule MyApp.Hello do
  @moduledoc """
  This is the Hello module.
  """
  @moduledoc since: "1.0.0"

  @doc """
  Says hello to the given `name`.

  Returns `:ok`.

  ## Examples

      iex> MyApp.Hello.world(:john)
      :ok

  """
  @doc since: "1.3.0"
  def world(name) do
    IO.puts("hello #{name}")
  end
end
```

The `@moduledoc` attribute is used to add documentation to the module. `@doc` is used before a function to provide documentation for it. Besides the attributes above, `@typedoc` can also be used to attach documentation to types defined as part of typespecs.

## Function arguments

When documenting a function, argument names are inferred by the compiler. For example:

```elixir
def size(%{size: size}) do
  size
end
```

The compiler will infer this argument as `map`. Sometimes the inference will be suboptimal, especially if the function contains multiple clauses with the argument matching on different values each time. You can specify the proper names for documentation by declaring only the function head at any moment before the implementation:

```elixir
def size(map_with_size)

def size(%{size: size}) do
  size
end
```

## Documentation metadata

Elixir allows developers to attach arbitrary metadata to the documentation. This is done by passing a keyword list to the relevant attribute (such as `@moduledoc`, `@typedoc`, and `@doc`).

Metadata can have any key. Documentation tools often use metadata to provide more data to readers and to enrich the user experience. The following keys already have a predefined meaning used by tooling:

### `:deprecated`

Another common metadata is `:deprecated`, which emits a warning in the documentation, explaining that its usage is discouraged:

```elixir
@doc deprecated: "Use Foo.bar/2 instead"
```

Note that the `:deprecated` key does not warn when a developer invokes the functions. If you want the code to also emit a warning, you can use the `@deprecated` attribute:

```elixir
@deprecated "Use Foo.bar/2 instead"
```

### `:group`

The group a function, callback or type belongs to. This is used in `iex` for autocompleting and also to automatically by [ExDoc](https://github.com/elixir-lang/ex_doc/) to group items in the sidebar:

```elixir
@doc group: "Query"
def all(query)

@doc group: "Schema"
def insert(schema)
```

### `:since`

It annotates in which version that particular module, function, type, or callback was added:

```elixir
@doc since: "1.3.0"
def world(name) do
  IO.puts("hello #{name}")
end
```

## Recommendations

When writing documentation:

  * Keep the first paragraph of the documentation concise and simple, typically one-line. Tools like [ExDoc](https://github.com/elixir-lang/ex_doc/) use the first line to generate a summary.

  * Reference modules by their full name. Markdown uses backticks (`` ` ``) to quote code. Elixir builds on top of that to automatically generate links when module or function names are referenced. For this reason, always use full module names. If you have a module called `MyApp.Hello`, always reference it as `` `MyApp.Hello` `` and never as `` `Hello` ``.

  * Reference functions by name and arity if they are local, as in `` `world/1` ``, or by module, name and arity if pointing to an external module: `` `MyApp.Hello.world/1` ``.

  * Reference a `@callback` by prepending `c:`, as in `` `c:world/1` ``.

  * Reference a `@type` by prepending `t:`, as in `` `t:values/0` ``.

  * Start new sections with second level Markdown headers `##`. First level headers are reserved for module and function names.

  * Place documentation before the first clause of multi-clause functions. Documentation is always per function and arity and not per clause.

  * Use the `:since` key in the documentation metadata to annotate whenever new functions or modules are added to your API.

## Doctests

We advise developers to include examples in their documentation, often under their own `## Examples` heading. To ensure examples do not get out of date, Elixir's test framework (ExUnit) provides a feature called doctests that allows developers to test the examples in their documentation. Doctests work by parsing out code samples starting with `iex>` from the documentation. You can read more about them at `ExUnit.DocTest`.

## Documentation != Code comments

Elixir treats documentation and code comments as different concepts. Documentation is an explicit contract between you and users of your Application Programming Interface (API), be they third-party developers, co-workers, or your future self. Modules and functions must always be documented if they are part of your API.

Code comments are aimed at developers reading the code. They are useful for marking improvements, leaving notes (for example, why you had to resort to a workaround due to a bug in a library), and so forth. They are tied to the source code: you can completely rewrite a function and remove all existing code comments, and it will continue to behave the same, with no change to either its behavior or its documentation.

Because private functions cannot be accessed externally, Elixir will warn if a private function has a `@doc` attribute and will discard its content. However, you can add code comments to private functions, as with any other piece of code, and we recommend developers to do so whenever they believe it will add relevant information to the readers and maintainers of such code.

In summary, documentation is a contract with users of your API, who may not necessarily have access to the source code, whereas code comments are for those who interact directly with the source. You can learn and express different guarantees about your software by separating those two concepts.

## Hiding internal modules and functions

Besides the modules and functions libraries provide as part of their public interface, libraries may also implement important functionality that is not part of their API. While these modules and functions can be accessed, they are meant to be internal to the library and thus should not have documentation for end users.

Conveniently, Elixir allows developers to hide modules and functions from the documentation, by setting `@doc false` to hide a particular function, or `@moduledoc false` to hide the whole module. If a module is hidden, you may even document the functions in the module, but the module itself won't be listed in the documentation:

```elixir
defmodule MyApp.Hidden do
  @moduledoc false

  @doc """
  This function won't be listed in docs.
  """
  def function_that_wont_be_listed_in_docs do
    # ...
  end
end
```

In case you don't want to hide a whole module, you can hide functions individually:

```elixir
defmodule MyApp.Sample do
  @doc false
  def add(a, b), do: a + b
end
```

However, keep in mind `@moduledoc false` or `@doc false` do not make a function private. The function above can still be invoked as `MyApp.Sample.add(1, 2)`. Not only that, if `MyApp.Sample` is imported, the `add/2` function will also be imported into the caller. For those reasons, be cautious when adding `@doc false` to functions, instead use one of these two options:

  * Move the undocumented function to a module with `@moduledoc false`, like `MyApp.Hidden`, ensuring the function won't be accidentally exposed or imported. Remember that you can use `@moduledoc false` to hide a whole module and still document each function with `@doc`. Tools will still ignore the module.

  * Start the function name with one or two underscores, for example, `__add__/2`. Functions starting with underscore are automatically treated as hidden, although you can also be explicit and add `@doc false`. The compiler does not import functions with leading underscores and they hint to anyone reading the code of their intended private usage.

## `Code.fetch_docs/1`

Elixir stores documentation inside pre-defined chunks in the bytecode. Documentation is not loaded into memory when modules are loaded, instead, it can be read from the bytecode in disk using the `Code.fetch_docs/1` function. The downside is that modules defined in-memory, like the ones defined in IEx, cannot have their documentation accessed as they do not write their bytecode to disk.
